1.35.1

महर्षिभिः शोणाकूले रात्रिशेषः उपासितः।
The rest of the night was spent by the great sages on the bank of the Shona.

सुप्रभातायां विश्वामित्रः अवोचत्।
When it had fully dawned, Vishwamitra spoke.

1.35.2

विश्वामित्रः- हे राम निशा सुप्रभाता।
Vishwamitra- O Rama, the night has fully dawned.

पूर्वा सन्ध्या प्रवर्तते।
The eastern twilight is appearing.

(त्वम्) उत्तिष्ठ उत्तिष्ठ।
Arise, arise.

तव भद्रम् अस्तु।
May prosperity be yours.

गमनाय (बुद्धिम्) कुरु।
Make up (your mind) for the journey.

1.35.3

(रामः) तस्य तत् वचनं श्रुत्वा पौर्वाह्णिकीं क्रियां कृत्वा गमनम् इष्टवान् अभूत्।
(Rama) having heard that word of his and performed the morning rites, desired the journey.

(सः) इदं वाक्यं च अवोचत्।
And he spoke this sentence.

1.35.4

रामः- हे ब्रह्मन् अयं शोणः पवित्रजलः गम्भीरः सैकतयुक्तः (अस्ति)।
Rama- O Brahmin, this Shona river has holy water, is deep, and is endowed with sandbanks.

वयं केन मार्गेण तरिष्यामः।
By which path shall we cross?

1.35.5

रामेण एवम् उक्तः तु विश्वामित्रः इदम् अवोचत्।
Addressed thus by Rama, Vishwamitra spoke this.

विश्वामित्रः- मया एषः मार्गः दर्शितः येन ऋषयः गच्छन्ति।
Vishwamitra- This path has been shown by me, by which the sages go.

1.35.6

बुद्धिमता विश्वामित्रेण एवम् उक्ताः ते महर्षयः।
Those great sages were thus addressed by the wise Vishwamitra.

नानाविधानि वनानि पश्यन्तः ते गताः।
They went looking at various forests.

1.35.7

ते दूरं मार्गं गताः तदा अर्धदिवसः जातः।
They went a long distance and then half the day passed.

(तैः) ऋषिसेविता नदीश्रेष्ठा गङ्गा दृष्टा।
The Ganges, the best of rivers served by sages, was seen (by them).

1.35.8

तां पवित्रजलां हंस-सारस-युक्तां दृष्ट्वा।
Having seen that river of holy water endowed with swans and cranes.

राम-लक्ष्मण-सहिताः सर्वे ऋषयः प्रसन्नाः भूताः।
All the sages accompanied by Rama and Lakshmana became happy.

1.35.9

ततः तैः तस्याः तीरे आवासः कृतः।
Then a camp was made by them on her bank.

ततः स्नात्वा विधिपूर्वकं पितरः देवाः च तर्पिताः।
Then having bathed, the ancestors and gods were satisfied according to the rules.

1.35.10

(तैः) अग्निहोत्राणि हुतानि।
(By them) The Agnihotra rituals were performed.

अमृत-तुल्यं हविः च भक्षितम्।
And the nectar-like sacrificial food was eaten.

प्रसन्न-मनसः ते पवित्रे गङ्गा-तटे उपविष्टाः।
With happy minds, they sat on the clean bank of the Ganges.

1.35.11

महात्मा विश्वामित्रः समन्ततः परिवारितः।
The great-souled Vishwamitra was surrounded on all sides.

अथ तत्र तदा रामः विश्वामित्रम् अवोचत्।
Then, at that time, Rama spoke to Vishwamitra there.

1.35.12

रामः- हे भगवन् त्रिमार्गगामिनीं गङ्गां श्रोतुम् इच्छामि।
Rama- O Lord, I wish to hear about the Ganga who flows in three paths.

कथं सा त्रिलोकं व्याप्य समुद्रं गता।
How did she go to the ocean, covering the three worlds?

1.35.13

रामस्य वाक्येन प्रेरितः महामुनिः विश्वामित्रः (अस्ति)।
The great sage Vishwamitra was urged by Rama's words.

गङ्गायाः विस्तारं जन्म च वक्तुम् आरब्धम्।
It was started to tell the expansion and birth of the Ganga.

1.35.14

विश्वामित्रः- हिमवान् नाम महान् पर्वतराजः धातूनां खनिः (अस्ति)।
Vishwamitra- Himavan by name is a great king of mountains and a mine of minerals.

हे राम पृथिव्यां रूपेण अनुपमं तस्य पुत्रीद्वयम् (अस्ति)।
O Rama, he has two daughters unequaled in beauty on earth.

1.35.15

विश्वामित्रः- हे राम या मेरोः पुत्री सुन्दरमध्या (सा) तयोः माता (अस्ति)।
Vishwamitra- O Rama, she who is the daughter of Meru having a beautiful waist is their mother.

(सा) नाम्ना मनोरमा हिमवतः प्रिया भार्या (अस्ति)।
She is the beloved wife of Himavat named Manorama.

1.35.16

विश्वामित्रः- हे राम तस्यां हिमवतः इयं ज्येष्ठा पुत्री गङ्गा उत्पन्ना।
Vishwamitra- O Rama, in her, this eldest daughter of Himavat, Ganga, was born.

तस्य एव द्वितीया उमा नाम भूता।
His second (daughter) was named Uma.

1.35.17

विश्वामित्रः- अथ सर्वैः देवैः देव-कार्यं कर्तुं पर्वतराजः ज्येष्ठां त्रिमार्गगामिनीं नदीं गङ्गां प्रार्थितः।
Vishwamitra- Then by all the gods, to perform the divine work, the King of Mountains was requested for the eldest river Ganga flowing in three paths.

1.35.18

विश्वामित्रः- हिमवता त्रैलोक्य-हित-काम्यया धर्मेण लोक-पावनी स्वेच्छा-गामिनी पुत्री गङ्गा दत्ता।
Vishwamitra- By Himavan, desiring the welfare of the three worlds, the world-purifying, free-flowing daughter Ganga was righteously given.

1.35.19

विश्वामित्रः- ततः देवैः (सा) स्वीकृता।
Vishwamitra- Then she was accepted by the gods.

ते गङ्गां नीत्वा सन्तुष्टेन मनसा गताः।
They took Ganga and went with a satisfied mind.

1.35.20

विश्वामित्रः- हे राम या च अन्या पर्वतपुत्री कन्या भूता।
Vishwamitra- O Rama, and she who was the other daughter of the mountain.

(तया) तपस्विन्या उग्रं व्रतम् आस्थाय तपः तप्तम्।
(By her) the ascetic, having undertaken a severe vow, penance was performed.

1.35.21

विश्वामित्रः- पर्वतश्रेष्ठेन उग्रेण तपसा युक्ता लोकवन्दिता सुता उमा अनुपमाय रुद्राय दत्ता।
Vishwamitra- By the best of mountains, the daughter Uma, endowed with severe penance and worshipped by the world, was given to the matchless Rudra.

1.35.22

विश्वामित्रः- हे राघव एते लोकपूजिते हिमवतः पुत्र्यौ (स्तः)।
Vishwamitra- O Raghava, these are those two daughters of Himavat worshipped by the world.

नदी-उत्तमा गङ्गा उमादेवी च (एते स्तः)।
(They are) Ganga, the best of rivers, and Goddess Uma.

1.35.23

विश्वामित्रः- हे तात ज्ञानिनां श्रेष्ठ एतत् सर्वं तुभ्यम् आख्यातम्।
Vishwamitra- O dear one, O best of the wise, all this has been told to you.

यथा त्रिमार्गगामिनी नदी प्रथमम् आकाश-मार्गं गता।
How the three-pathed river first went to the path of the sky.

1.35.24

विश्वामित्रः- सा एषा सुन्दरी देवनदी पर्वतराजस्य पुत्री (अस्ति)।
Vishwamitra- This very beautiful river of gods is the daughter of the King of Mountains.

तदा निष्पापा जलरूपा (सा) स्वर्गं गता।
Then the sinless (river) went to heaven in the form of water.