1.18.1
[महात्मनः] राज्ञः अश्वमेध-यागे निर्वृत्ते सति, सुराः भागान् प्रतिगृह्य, यथागतं प्रतिगताः।
When the Ashvamedha sacrifice of the great-souled king was completed, the gods, having received their shares, returned from whence they came.

1.18.2
[समाप्त-दीक्षा-नियमः] [पत्नीगण-समन्वितः] [सभृत्य-बल-वाहनः] राजा दशरथः पुरीं प्रविष्टवान् अभूत्।
Having completed the rules of initiation, King Dasharatha, accompanied by his group of wives and with his servants, army, and vehicles, entered the city.

1.18.3
तेन राज्ञा यथार्हं पूजिताः [पृथिवीश्वराः] [मुदिताः] भूत्वा, [मुनिपुङ्गवं] वसिष्ठं प्रणम्य, स्वदेशान् प्रति गताः।
Those lords of the earth, having been honored in a fitting manner by the king and being pleased, returned to their own countries after bowing to the best of sages, Vasistha.

1.18.4
ततः पुरात् स्वपुराणि गच्छतां तेषां [श्रीमतां] राज्ञाम्, [शुभ्राणि] [प्रहृष्टानि] बलानि शोभितानि अभूवन्।
As the armies of those glorious kings were departing from the city to their own cities, their bright and cheerful forces shone.

1.18.5
पृथिवीश्वराणां गमनात् परं, तदा [श्रीमान्] राजा दशरथः [द्विजोत्तमान्] पुरस्कृत्य, पुरीं प्रविष्टः।
After the departure of the kings, the glorious King Dasharatha then entered the city, placing the best of Brahmins at the forefront.

1.18.6
अथ [सुपूजितः] ऋष्यशृङ्गः, [धीमता] [सानुयात्रेण] राज्ञा रोमपादेन अन्वीयमानः सन्, शान्तया सार्धं गतः।
Then the well-honored Rishyashringa, being accompanied by the wise King Romapada and his followers, departed with Shanta.

1.18.7
राजा दशरथः एवं तान् सर्वान् विसृज्य, [सम्पूर्णमानसः] भूत्वा, पुत्रोत्पत्तिं विचिन्तयन्, तत्र सुखितः उषितवान् अभूत्।
Having thus sent them all away, King Dasharatha, with a fulfilled mind, lived there happily, contemplating the birth of his sons.

1.18.8
ततः यज्ञे समाप्ते सति षट् ऋतवः समतीताः अभूवन्। ततः द्वादशः मासः, चैत्रः मासः, नवमी तिथिः च अभूत्।
Then, after the sacrifice was completed, six seasons passed. It was then the twelfth month, the month of Chaitra, and the ninth lunar day.

1.18.9
अदिति-दैवत्यं नक्षत्रम् अभूत्। पञ्च ग्रहाः स्वोच्च-स्थिताः अभूवन्। कर्कटः लग्नः अभूत्, वाक्पतिः च इन्दुना सह प्रोद्यमानः अभूत्।
The star was Punarvasu, whose deity is Aditi. Five planets were in their exalted positions. The ascendant was Cancer, and Jupiter was rising with the Moon.

1.18.10
तस्मिन् काले कौसल्या [जगन्नाथं], [सर्वलोकनमस्कृतं], [सर्वलक्षणसंयुतं], [विष्णोः अर्धं], [महाभागं], [ऐक्ष्वाकुवर्धनं] रामं नाम पुत्रं जनितवती अभूत्।
At that time, Kausalya gave birth to a son named Rama, who was the lord of the universe, honored by all the worlds, endowed with all auspicious signs, a portion of Vishnu himself, greatly fortunate, and the perpetuator of the Ikshvaku race.

1.18.11
कौसल्या विष्णोः अर्धभागं महाभागं इक्ष्वाकुवंशस्य वर्धकम् अमिततेजसं च पुत्रं प्राप्य तेन पुत्रेण शोभिता।
Kausalya was adorned by that son, who was half of Vishnu, highly fortunate, the enhancer of the Ikshvaku lineage, and possessed of boundless luster.

1.18.12
यथा वज्रपाणिना इन्द्रेण अदितिः शोभिता, तथा कौसल्या स्वपुत्रेण शोभिता। कैकेय्यां सत्यपराक्रमः भरतः नाम पुत्रः जातः।
Just as Aditi was adorned by Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, so was Kausalya adorned by her own son. A son named Bharata, of true valor, was born to Kaikeyi.

1.18.13
भरतः साक्षात् विष्णोः चतुर्थभागः सर्वैः गुणैः युक्तः। अथ सुमित्रा लक्ष्मणं शत्रुघ्नं च इति द्वौ सुतौ जनितवती अभूत्।
Bharata was the manifest one-fourth part of Vishnu and endowed with all virtues. Then, Sumitra gave birth to two sons, Lakshmana and Shatrughna.

1.18.14
लक्ष्मणशत्रुघ्नौ वीरौ सर्वास्त्रकुशलौ विष्णोः अंशांशयुक्तौ। प्रसन्नबुद्धिः भरतः तु पुष्यनक्षत्रे मीनलग्ने जातः।
Lakshmana and Shatrughna were heroes, skilled in all weaponry, and endowed with portions of Vishnu. The clear-minded Bharata was born under the Pushya star in the Pisces ascendant.

1.18.15
लक्ष्मणशत्रुघ्नौ आश्लेषानक्षत्रे सूर्योदये सति कर्कटकलग्ने जातौ। राज्ञः दशरथस्य चत्वारः महात्मानः पुत्राः पृथक् पृथक् जाताः।
Lakshmana and Shatrughna were born under the Ashlesha star at sunrise in the Cancer ascendant. The four great-souled sons of King Dasaratha were born separately.

1.18.16
ते पुत्राः गुणवन्तः सुन्दराः कान्त्या प्रोष्ठपदनक्षत्रतुल्याः। गन्धर्वाः मधुरं गीतवन्तः अभूवन्। अप्सरसः च नर्तितवत्यः अभूवन्।
Those sons were virtuous, beautiful, and comparable in luster to the Proshthapada stars. The Gandharvas sang sweetly, and the Apsaras danced.

1.18.17
देवदुन्दुभयः ध्वनितवन्तः अभूवन्। आकाशात् पुष्पवृष्टिः च पतिता। अयोध्यायां जनाकीर्णः महान् उत्सवः जातः।
The celestial drums resounded, and a shower of flowers fell from the sky. A great festival filled with people took place in Ayodhya.

1.18.18
नगरमार्गाः जनैः नटैः नर्तकैः च व्याप्ताः। मार्गाः गायकानां वादकानां च शब्दैः नादिताः।
The city streets were filled with people, actors, and dancers. The streets resonated with the sounds of singers and instrumentalists.

1.18.19
राजा दशरथः सूत-मागध-वन्दिभ्यः उपहारं दत्तवान् अभूत्। राजा दशरथः ब्राह्मणेभ्यः धनं सहस्रशः गोधनानि च दत्तवान् अभूत्।
King Dasaratha gave gifts to the bards, genealogists, and minstrels. King Dasaratha gave wealth and thousands of cows to the Brahmins.

1.18.20
एकादशदिनेभ्यः राज्ञा दशरथेन नामकर्म कृतम्। ज्येष्ठस्य 'रामः' इति कृतम्। कैकयीसुतस्य च 'भरतः' इति कृतम्।
After eleven days, the naming ceremony was performed by King Dasaratha. The name 'Rama' was given to the eldest, and 'Bharata' was given to Kaikeyi's son.

1.18.21
सुमित्रासुतस्य 'लक्ष्मणः' इति नाम कृतम्। वसिष्ठस्य अपरस्य सुतस्य च 'शत्रुघ्नः' इति नाम कृतम्। एवं परमप्रीतेन वसिष्ठेन नामानि कृतानि।
The name 'Lakshmana' was given to Sumitra's son. And the name 'Shatrughna' was given to the other son (by Vasistha). Thus, the names were made by the very pleased Vasistha.

1.18.22
राजा दशरथः ब्राह्मणान् पौरान् जानपदान् अपि भोजितवान् अभूत्। राजा दशरथः ब्राह्मणेभ्यः बहु अमितं रत्नसमूहं च दत्तवान् अभूत्।
King Dasaratha fed the Brahmins, the citizens, and the country-folk. King Dasaratha gave a large heap of boundless gems to the Brahmins.

1.18.23
राजा दशरथः पुत्राणां जन्मक्रियादीनि सर्वकर्माणि कारितवान् अभूत्। तेषां पुत्राणां मध्ये ज्येष्ठः रामः केतुः इव पितुः दशरथस्य रतिकरः अभूत्।
King Dasaratha had the birth rites and all other ceremonies performed for the sons. Among those sons, the eldest, Rama, like a banner, was the delighter of his father Dasaratha.

1.18.24
रामः ब्रह्मा इव सर्वभूतानां सम्मतः अभूत्। चत्वारः पुत्राः वेदविदः शूराः लोकहिते रताः च अभूवन्।
Rama became beloved to all living beings, just like Brahma. All four sons were knowers of the Vedas, heroes, and devoted to the welfare of the world.

1.18.25
चत्वारः पुत्राः ज्ञानयुक्ताः सर्वगुणैः युक्ताः च अभूवन्। तेषां पुत्राणां मध्ये अपि रामः महातेजाः सत्यपराक्रमः च अभूत्।
All four sons were endowed with knowledge and possessed of all virtues. Yet, among those sons, Rama was of especially great luster and true valor.

1.18.26
रामः सर्वस्य लोकस्य इष्टः शशाङ्कः इव निर्मलः च अभूत्। रामः गजस्कन्धे अश्वपृष्ठे रथचर्यासु च समर्थः जातः।
Rama became beloved to the whole world and pure like the moon. Rama became capable in riding elephants, horses, and in driving chariots.

1.18.27
रामः धनुर्वेदे निरतः पितृसेवायाम् च रतः अभूत्। लक्ष्मिवर्धनः लक्ष्मणः बाल्यात् प्रभृति रामे सुस्निग्धः जातः।
Rama was intent on the science of archery and devoted to the service of his father. The prosperity-increasing Lakshmana became very affectionate towards Rama from childhood.

1.18.28
लक्ष्मणः लोकरामस्य ज्येष्ठस्य भ्रातुः रामस्य नित्यं सर्वप्रियकरः अभूत्। लक्ष्मणः तस्य रामस्य शरीरात् अपि प्रियः अभूत्।
Lakshmana was always the doer of pleasing deeds for his eldest brother Rama, the delight of the world. Lakshmana was dearer to that Rama even than his own body.

1.18.29
लक्ष्मिसम्पन्नः लक्ष्मणः रामस्य अपरः बहिःप्राणः इव अभूत्। पुरुषोत्तमः रामः लक्ष्मणेन विना निद्रां न लब्धवान् अभूत्।
The fortunate Lakshmana was like another life-breath existing outside for Rama. The Supreme Man, Rama, did not get sleep without Lakshmana.

1.18.30
रामः लक्ष्मणेन विना उपानीतं मृष्टम् अन्नं न भुक्तवान् अभूत्। राघवः हयम् आरूढः सन् मृगयां गतवान् अभूत्।
Rama did not eat the dainty food brought to him without Lakshmana. Raghava went hunting mounted on a horse.